{"chunk_index": 0, "total_chunks": 7, "token_count": 3704, "max_tokens": 4000, "char_start": 0, "char_end": 16414, "chars": 16414, "doc_chars": 99005, "source": "grobid", "doc_id": "2025.12.02.691876v1.full", "model_id": "Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct"}
---
Multiscale Spatial Transcriptomic Atlas of Human Basal Ganglia Cell-Type and Cellular Community Organization

Multiscale Spatial Transcriptomic Atlas of Human Basal Ganglia Cell-Type and Cellular Community Organization

Highlights

• Our multi-centimeter scale spatial taxonomy identifies the precise locations of 60 neuronal and glial cell types of human basal ganglia.

• MERFISH+ and Stereo-seq platforms map consistent spatial modules that align with classical neuroanatomical nuclei.

• D1D2 hybrid MSNs and primate-expanded interneurons show regional and domain specific organization

• Subcellular RNA localization reports soma morphology and projection-inferred signatures.

SUMMARY

We generated a multi-region, subcellular-resolution spatial transcriptomic atlas of the human basal ganglia by integrating MERFISH+ and Stereo-seq across four neurotypical donors. These datasets profiled ~7 million cells spanning the caudate, putamen, nucleus accumbens, and globus pallidus, resolving 60 transcriptionally distinct cell types.

We show region-selective, molecular and spatial diversification of medium-spiny-neuron cell types and multiple non-neuronal populations with distinct molecular identities and spatial localizations. Subcellular RNA localization captures somatic size and projectioninferred signatures that reflect direct and indirect pathway topology. Cellular community analyses reveal the enrichment of sub-clusters of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes at striosome-matrix borders, while primate-expanded interneurons are confined to matrix territories. Cross-species mapping uncovers orthologous striosome-matrix organization and conserved dorsolateral-ventromedial gene expression gradients. This atlas provides a foundational molecular and spatial framework for studying human basal ganglia architecture, offering a multi-centimeter scale resource that links cell types, spatial architecture, and subcellular transcript topography across multiple nuclei.

INTRODUCTION

The human basal ganglia is a critical brain structure involved in motor control, learning and emotion. It is comprised of distinct anatomical nuclei / subdivisions including the striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen), the globus pallidus (external and internal segments, GPe and GPi), and the nucleus accumbens (NAc) 1. Basal ganglia cell types and architecture are well characterized in rodents and non-human primates, but are much less understood in humans. The literature from both animal models and humans shows that GABAergic medium spiny neurons (MSNs) are the dominant neuronal cell type in the striatum (85-95%) [2][3][4][5]; MSNs are divided into two major populations: D1-type MSNs, which express the dopamine receptor D1 (DRD1), tachykinin precursor 1 (TAC1), and dynorphin; and D2-type MSNs, which express the dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2), proenkephalin (PENK), and enkephalin 2,3,6. The D1 and D2 populations are spatially organized into interdigitated striosome and matrix compartments that form the structural foundation of basal ganglia function 3,7,8. Further studies, including those using singlenucleus RNA-seq in animal and human brains have revealed additional D1/D2 neuronal diversity 9,10, and identified multiple classes of interneurons, including cholinergic (choline acetyltransferase-positive; ChAT+), parvalbumin-positive (PV+), somatostatinpositive (SST+), and neuropeptide Y/tyrosine hydroxylase-positive (NPY+/TH+) subtypes [10][11][12][13][14]. The nucleus accumbens, located at the ventral extension of the striatum, contains both D1 and D2 MSNs and is further divided into core and shell subregions.

These subregions mirror the cellular composition of the dorsal striatum, including diverse interneuron classes 10,15. The globus pallidus consists of two principal divisions: the external segment (GPe) and the internal segment (GPi) 3,16. Both regions are dominated by PV+ GABAergic projection neurons 17. Within GPe, prototypic neurons express PV, LIM homeobox 6 (LHX6), and NK2 homeobox 1 (NKX2-1) 18,19; arkypallidal neurons express neuronal PAS domain protein 1 (NPAS1) and forkhead box protein P2 (FOXP2) 20,21. GPi contains PV+/LHX6+ projection neurons that form the principal output pathway of the basal ganglia 16,17.

A comprehensive understanding of human basal ganglia organization requires integrating cell-type identity, molecular signatures, and spatial architecture within an intact anatomical framework. Traditional single-cell RNA sequencing provides molecular resolution but lacks spatial context, limiting its ability to capture circuit-level organization. Emerging spatial transcriptomic technologies map gene expression directly within intact tissue sections that retain the spatial relationships of cell types and structures 10,14,[22][23][24]. These methods include probe-based multiplexed fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based spatially resolved transcriptomics, each with complementary strengths in resolution, transcriptome coverage, and throughput 23,25,26. These approaches enable an unprecedented mapping of brain architecture through quantitative classification of cell types and detection of spatially patterned gene expression. Although previous studies have revealed the spatial organization of striosomes within the striatal matrix and transcriptional gradients across basal ganglia nuclei in model organisms such as mice and macaques 10,27, a comprehensive molecular and cell-type-resolved spatial atlas of the adult human basal ganglia remains lacking. This gap has persisted in part because of the large size and complex cytoarchitecture of human basal ganglia nuclei, as well as technical limitations in the spatial scale and resolution of existing mapping approaches.

Addressing this limitation is particularly critical given the central role of the basal ganglia in human movement disorders (including Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease), neuropsychiatric conditions, and species-specific differences in basal ganglia cellular composition and structural organization that reflect the complexity of inputs and outputs for these structures in humans 7,28.

Recent advances in large-scale spatially resolved transcriptomics have transformed our ability to characterize cellular heterogeneity and molecular architecture within intact neural tissue such as human basal ganglia. Two particularly powerful approaches are Multiplexed Error-Robust Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (MERFISH) 26,[29][30][31][32][33] and Spatio-Temporal Enhanced Resolution Omics-sequencing (Stereo-seq) [34][35][36][37][38]. MERFISH enables highly multiplexed, single-molecule RNA imaging at subcellular resolution, allowing the precise mapping of hundreds to thousands of genes within individual cells while maintaining their spatial context 26,29,31. This approach has been instrumental in decoding cell-type organization across cortical and subcortical structures in multiple species that reveal both conserved and species-specific architectural principles in the mouse, monkey and human brains 14,27,36,[39][40][41]. Subsequent advancements in MERFISH have expanded high-resolution spatial transcriptomics into a multimodal platform capable of imaging DNA, RNA, and proteins within the same tissue specimen 42,43. Most recently, the incorporation of modified probe designs, high-throughput microscopy, and microfluidic automation has led to MERFISH+ 44, an enhanced implementation that enables imaging across multi-centimeter-scale tissue areas. This extension achieves large-area spatial transcriptomics with subcellular precision for integrative molecular and structural analyses 44. Stereo-seq employs DNA nanoball-patterned arrays to generate spatially barcoded cDNA libraries that capture transcriptomes from large tissue sections at high resolution 34,[36][37][38]. Stereo-seq has been successfully applied to generate whole-brain atlases in mice and to characterize cortical and subcortical organization in nonhuman primates [34][35][36][37][38]. This sequencing-based approach provides an unbiased, genome-wide view of spatial gene-expression patterns across extensive anatomical domains, albeit at a lower spatial resolution compared with imaging-based methods such as MERFISH+.

In this study, we harness complementary strengths of MERFISH+ and Stereo-seq to generate a multiscale spatial transcriptomic atlas of the human basal ganglia to capture spatial gene-expression patterns, specific cell types, and molecular architectures across multi-centimeter tissue sections from four neurotypical adult postmortem donors. This atlas offers a novel view of human basal ganglia organization of cell types, cellular communities, and region-specific transcriptional gradients at subcellular precision that was previously uncharted.

RESULTS

Multi-region, subcellular-resolution spatial transcriptomic mapping of human basal ganglia

We obtained four postmortem human brain fresh frozen slabs across anterior-toposterior segments of the basal ganglia encompassing the caudate nucleus, putamen, nucleus accumbens (NAc), globus pallidus, and internal capsule (Figure 1A). Tissue samples were collected from four neurotypical Caucasian male donors, aged 36-53 years, with no pathological evidence of neurodegenerative disease or other brain injury.

RNA quality was confirmed by RNA Integrity Number (RIN) values ranging from 7.0 to 8.4, indicating excellent preservation for downstream analyses (Table S1).

For spatial transcriptomic profiling, 10 µm-thick cryostat sections were processed for Stereo-seq with the coverage area size of up to 20 mm × 30 mm, while adjacent 16 µmthick sections were selected for MERFISH+ imaging with an area size of up to 43 mm × 30 mm (Figure 1A, Supplementary Movie 1, Table 1S & Figure 1S in Supplemental Information). A single 20mm x 30mm Stereo-seq chip captured ~0.9 million cells (with ~0.29 million cells selected for cell type classification), which were clustered into 10 different major cell types (Figure 1B). Across four Stereo-seq assays, we obtained genome-wide transcriptomic coverage of ~70,000 genes across ~3.2 million cells. In parallel, comparable numbers of cells per area were captured by MERFISH+ on adjacent sections targeting a panel of 673 selected genes (Figure 1C, Supplemental Data). Four MERFISH+ experiments captured ~3.9 million cells at single-molecule resolution over multi-centimeter-scale tissue areas. Both methods yielded highly concordant results for the spatial distributions of major cell types across corresponding anatomical regions (Figure S1A). Although Stereo-seq detects fewer transcripts per cell due to its sequencing-based capture efficiency, the expression levels of the 673 MERFISH+ target genes show strong cross-platform correlation between the two modalities (Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.71), demonstrating the quantitative agreement of spatial gene-expression measurements across methodological approaches (Figure S1B) with high reproducibility across and between experiments (Figure S1C-D). Although Stereo-seq provides transcriptome-wide coverage, its spatial signal localization is inherently more diffuse (Figure 1D-G) than MERFISH+ that delineates sharp cellular boundaries based on transcript density (Figures 1H-K; Supplementary Movie 1). Given these respective advantages and limitations, we used MERFISH+ to focus on fine-scale cell definition and subcellular localization, and Stereoseq for exploring large scale gene expression patterns across centimeter scale tissue.

Molecular and spatial taxonomy of cell types in the human basal ganglia

Using MERFISH+, we resolve approximately 60 transcriptionally distinct cell types that are separable when embedded in Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) space of gene-expression data (Figure 2A). These cell types show expression of expected corresponding marker genes (Figure S2) and demonstrate strong correspondence with single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) datasets from the Allen Institute Mammalian Basal Ganglia Consensus Cell Type Atlas (Allen Institute; RRID:SCR_024672) 45 (Figure 2B), validating our cell type classification. We identify twelve major classes spanning anterior-to-posterior sections (Figure 2C). Among these are eight neuronal classes that include caudal and lateral ganglionic eminence (CGE/LGE)-derived GABAergic neurons, which are dominated by medium spiny neurons (MSNs) (Figure S3A).

We further examined MSNs -the predominant neuronal population of the striatum that are essential for modulating movement control in the basal ganglia circuit 3. MSNs segregate into two canonical classes -D1 and D2 MSNs -further subdivided into six major dopaminergic MSN subtypes: STRd D1 Striosome, STRd D1 Matrix, STRv D1, STRd D2 Striosome, STRd D2 Matrix and STRv D2 (dorsal striatum, STRd; ventral striatum, STRv) (Figure 2D-E, Figure S3B). These subtypes display distinct dorsalventral and striosome-matrix distribution patterns across basal ganglia compartments along the anterior-posterior axis (Figure 2D, Figure S3B). Specifically, D1 and D2 striosomal MSNs are enriched within striosome compartments, whereas D1 and D2 matrix MSNs predominate in the surrounding matrix (Figure 2E).

The proportion of MSN cell types is largely consistent along the anterior-posterior axis (Figure 2F). D2 MSNs constitute the largest proportion compared to D1 MSNs (approximately 54 % vs 27 %, respectively). D1 and D2 MSNs together represent ~83 % of all striatal neurons.

Beyond these canonical MSN populations, our analyses uncover spatial distributions of several novel and rare MSN cell types described across species including mouse and non-human primate that are "mixed-identity" neurons that co-express D1-and D2associated gene modules -these neurons are not regionally restricted cell types to discrete striatal or pallidal territories [46][47][48]. The D1-D2 hybrid (STR D1D2 Hybrid), striosome-matrix hybrid (STRd D2 Hybrid), and D1 NUDAP (Neurochemically Unique Domains in the Accumbens and Putamen) (STRv D1 NUDAP) MSNs are primarily localized within the putamen, caudate nucleus, and nucleus accumbens (Figure 2G), but are largely absent from the globus pallidus and internal capsule. The mixed state of these cell populations is corroborated by colocalization within individual neurons of multiple transcripts of DRD1, DRD2, and prodynorphin (PDYN), a canonical striosomal MSN marker (Figure 2H).

We next examined neuronal subtypes within the globus pallidus. Analysis of two posterior sections encompassing both internal (GPi) and external (GPe) segments reveal six transcriptionally distinct GP-associated neuronal classes: GPi Shell, GPi Core, GPin-BF Cholinergic, CN LHX6-GBX1, GPe SOX6-CTXND1, and GPe MEIS2-SOX6 (Figure 2I, Figure S4). As indicated by their nomenclature, GPi Shell and GPi Core neurons are localized to peripheral and central GP regions, respectively (Figure 2J). In contrast, GPe SOX6-CTXND1 and CN LHX6-GBX1 neurons are concentrated within the GPe and show only sparse distributions in other basal ganglia nuclei (Figure 2K).

In addition to neuronal classes, we uncovered multiple non-neuronal populations with distinct molecular identities and spatial localizations (Figure 3A, Figure S5). Four major categories are observed: immune, vascular, astrocytic/ependymal (Astro-Epen), and oligodendrocyte lineage (OPC-Oligo) cells, each exhibiting characteristic regional patterns. OPC-Oligo cells represent the oligodendrocyte lineage and form the most abundant non-neuronal population, comprising 60-70% of all non-neuronal cells (Figure 3A-left). This group includes five transcriptionally distinct subtypes: committed oligodendrocyte progenitors (COP), oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPC), Oligo PLEKHG1, immune-associated oligodendrocytes (ImOligo), and Oligo OPALIN (Figure 3A-right). Notably, Oligo OPALIN and Oligo PLEKHG1 display complementary spatial distributions (Figure 3B) with differential transcriptional signatures (Figure 3C). We found that Oligo OPALIN cells are enriched along striatopallidal fiber tracts (arrows, Figure 3B-right), whereas Oligo PLEKHG1 cells are preferentially localized to the internal capsule white matter and globus pallidus, but are sparse in the putamen and caudate nucleus -this pattern is consistent across different sections (Figure S6A).