{"chunk_index": 1, "global_offset": 39430, "total_chunks": 3, "chars": 44936, "doc_chars": 87548, "source": "structural", "doc_id": "2025.12.02.691876v1.full"}
---
In summary, by coupling genome-wide spatial profiling with subcellular transcript localization and community-level modeling, we deliver a multiscale, molecular atlas of human basal ganglia organization from single transcripts to cellular communities and anatomical modules that shows features unique to humans and those that are conserved across species. This atlas establishes a foundational framework for studying human basal ganglia architecture and its disruption in neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders, enabling cross-species and disease-state comparisons at single-cell and community scales. X.X. and B.B. conceived the study. X.X., B.B. and Z.T designed the experiments. B.T.B., B.B., and X.X. designed the gene probe libraries. J.B., P.A.S.M, G.W, and Z.T. prepared samples, Z.T. and S.C.D performed the experiments. B.T.B., B.E., R.L., and B.B. performed data analysis. X.X., and B.B. interpreted data. B.T.B., Z.T., T.C.H., B.B. and X.X. wrote and edited the manuscript with input from G.W., S.C.D., Q.Y., R.L., M.N., S.P., Q.Z., M.B., and J.E. X.X. supervised the study. The myeloarchitecture of impulsivity: premature responding in youth is associated with decreased myelination of ventral putamen. Neuropsychopharmacology 44, 1216-1223. 10.1038/s41386-019-0343-6. 74. Krishnan, S., Cler, G.J., Smith, H.J., Willis, H.E., Asaridou, S.S., Healy, M.P., Papp, D., and Watkins, K.E. (2022). Quantitative MRI reveals differences in striatal myelin in children with DLD. Elife 11. 10.7554/eLife.74242. 75. De Biase, L.M., Schuebel, K.E., Fusfeld, Z.H., Jair, K., Hawes, I.A., Cimbro, R., Zhang, H.Y., Liu, Q.R., Shen, H., Xi, Z.X., et al. (2017). Local Cues Establish and Maintain Region-Specific Phenotypes of Basal Ganglia Microglia. Neuron 95, 341-356 e346. 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.06.020. 76. Woolley, S.C., Rajan, R., Joshua, M., and Doupe, A.J. (2014). Emergence of context-dependent variability across a basal ganglia network. Neuron 82, 208-223. 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.01.039. 77. Niccolini, F., Foltynie, T., Reis Marques, T., Muhlert, N., Tziortzi, A.C., Searle, G.E., Natesan, S., Kapur, S., Rabiner, E.A., Gunn, R.N., et al. (2015). Loss of phosphodiesterase 10A expression is associated with progression and severity in Parkinson's disease. Brain 138, 3003-3015. 10.1093/brain/awv219. 78. Beaumont, V., Zhong, S., Lin, H., Xu, W., Bradaia, A., Steidl, E., Gleyzes, M., Wadel, K., Buisson, B., Padovan-Neto, F.E., et al. (2016). Phosphodiesterase 10A Inhibition Improves Cortico-Basal Ganglia Function in Huntington's Disease Models. Neuron 92, 1220-1237. 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.10.064. 79. Stringer, C., Wang, T., Michaelos, M., and Pachitariu, M. (2021). Cellpose: a generalist algorithm for cellular segmentation. Nat Methods 18, 100-106. 10.1038/s41592-020-01018-x. 80. Wolf, F.A., Angerer, P., and Theis, F.J. (2018). SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis. Genome Biol 19, 15. 10.1186/s13059-017-1382-0. 81. Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T.E., Haberland, M., Reddy, T., Cournapeau, D., Burovski, E., Peterson, P., Weckesser, W., Bright, J., et al. (2020). SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python. Nat Methods 17, 261-272. 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2. of the human basal ganglia with Stereo-seq and MERFISH+ (A) Overview of study design, donor and sample quality and metadata, tissue sampling strategy, and adjacent-section workflows. (B) Stereo-seq dataset from an anterior basal ganglia section (donor case ID 2724): left, spatial map with cell-type assignments; right, UMAP embedding resolving 10 major cell classes from the same section. (C) MERFISH+ dataset from an adjacent anterior section. Left, spatial map with cell-type assignments; right, UMAP embedding resolving 10 major cell classes corresponding to Stereo-seq in (B). (D-G, progressively greater magnification) Multi-scale Stereo-seq enlarged views of the boxed region in (B), illustrating the resolution span from centimeter-scale tissue anatomy to micron-scale detection of individual transcripts, with corresponding cell-type labels (D, E), cell-contour segmentation (F), and single-cell detail (G). (H-K, progressively greater magnification) Multi-scale MERFISH+ enlarged views of the boxed region in (C), showing transcripts for selected genes (DRD1, DRD2, PENK, CCK, SST, CHAT, MBP) (color coded) and other genes (gray coded) that define cell-types at micron-scale resolution. See color keys at (K). Scale bars as indicated basal ganglia. (A) UMAP embedding of MERFISH+ single cell data with 60 transcriptionally defined basal ganglia (A) Fractional composition of major non-neuronal classes (left) and OPC/oligodendrocyte (Oligo) subtypes (right) for all combined sections and across the anterior-posterior axis (AP 18a, 19a, 26a, 34a). (B) Spatial distributions of two oligodendrocyte subtypes, Oligo-OPALIN and Oligo-PLEKHG1. Zoomed-in views of the boxed regions: (1) internal capsule, (2) putamen with striatopallidal fiber bundles (arrows), and (3) GPe. (C) Heatmap (log1p z-score) of the top differentially expressed genes distinguishing Oligo-OPALIN and Oligo-PLEKHG1 subtypes. (D) UMAP of six subtypes of astrocytes defined based on the MERFISH+ astrocytic genes measured, with expression maps for representative differentially expressed astrocytic genes. (E) Heatmap (log1p z-score) of the top differentially expressed genes associated with each astrocyte subtype. (F) Fractional composition of astrocyte subtypes for all combined sections and across the anterior-posterior (AP) axis (left -right: AP 18a, 19a, 26a, 34a, stacked bars). (G-J) Spatial distributions of the six astrocyte subtypes in anterior (AP 18a) and posterior (AP 34a) sections (G), including (H) white-matter-enriched astrocytes (WM_Astro) localized to the internal capsule with high AQP1 expression Color keys are consistent across panels (G-J). Astrocyte cell type key as shown in (D).

Scale bars as indicated. somatic morphology and projection signatures. (A) Images of MERFISH+ transcripts pseudo-colored to indicate subcellular localization: nuclear (white), cytoplasmic (yellow), and putative cellular processes (red) across nine selected cell types. Distinct localization profiles highlight cell-type-specific soma size, shape, and putative neuritic extent. DAPI shown in blue but largely masked by the nuclear transcript signal. (B) Estimated soma means and ranges of volumes (µm³) inferred from transcript-density segmentation across neuronal cell types in the human basal ganglia, including those shown in (A). (C) Plot of differential gene expression between D1 and D2 matrix MSNs measured by MERFISH+. Genes are ranked based on differential expressions. Top differential expressed genes are annotated. (D) Spatial maps of transcripts localized in putative cellular processes for genes enriched in D1 matrix MSNs (RELN, EBF1, SLIT2; top) and D2 matrix MSNs (DRD2, PENK, CHRM3; bottom). (E) Section-wide correlation maps of D1 matrix MSN (top) and D2 matrix MSN (bottom) gene expression with the expression in putative cellular processes across the entire posterior section (AP34a). Dashed blue outline marks GPe and dashed yellow outline marks GPi. Projection-biased localization reflects direct (D1→GPi) versus indirect (D2→GPe) pathway topology. (F) Gene expression map of SEMA3E transcripts modules of the human basal ganglia (A) Spatial map of major cell types of the posterior section (as shown in Figure 2D) and inferred cellular community modules derived from the local neighborhood composition analysis, accompanied by a UMAP embedding of community-level clustering across major cell classes. (B) Top: Community module assignments mapped onto anatomical regions across the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis (AP 18a, 19a, 26a, 34a), capturing mesoscale organization. Bottom: Corresponding anatomical reference images from the Allen Human Brain Atlas 59 . Pu, putamen; Ca, caudate; NAc, nucleus accumbens; GP, globus pallidus. Color keys are consistent across panels in (B). (C) Heatmap showing cell-type enrichment scores for each community module (rows = cell types; columns = modules). (D) Spatial distribution of fast-spiking interneurons (STR FS PTHLH-PVALB) across A-P levels, highlighting preferential enrichment in caudate. Right: odds-ratio plot quantifying caudate > putamen representation (* p = 0.021; Wilcoxon rank-sum). (E) Spatial distribution of cholinergic interneurons (STRd ChAT+) across the A-P axis, showing relative enrichment in putamen compared to caudate. Right: odds-ratio plot quantifying putamen > caudate representation (* p = 0.021; Wilcoxon rank-sum). (F) organization, gene-expression spatial gradients, and cross-species correspondence in the human basal ganglia. (A) UMAP computed based on cellular community analysis restricted to MSN cell types. Leiden clustering defines the matrix (purple) and striosome (blue) (left). Different types of MSNs are colored as indicated (right). (B) Spatial maps of striosome and matrix compartments (defined in A) across anterior-posterior (A-P) sections (AP 18a, 19a, 26a, 34a). (C) Cell-type enrichment (odds ratios) for striosome versus matrix compartments. Dot size reflects statistical significance (-log₁₀ FDR). P-values are derived using right-tailed chi-square tests; FDR adjustment via the Benjamini-Hochberg method; odds ratios via Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test. For purpose of visualization, odds ratio values associated with the striosome are multiplied by -1. (D) Spatial distributions of interneuron subtypes showing compartmental biases: STR TAC3 GABAergic interneurons enriched in matrix and VIP+ GABAergic interneurons enriched the 60 transcriptomics cell types identified by MERFISH+. The dot-plot shows 150 differential expressed genes out of the 673 MERFISH+ imaged genes, thus validating the distinction between 60 transcriptomics cell types. pallidus-associated neuronal subtypes across anterior-posterior coronal sections of the human basal ganglia. (A) Relative proportions of all neuronal cell types including non-MSN and globus pallidus (GP) neuron subtypes-as well as CGEand MGE-derived GABAergic neuron subclasses, in both combined and individual MERFISH+ assays, showing all sections versus AP-specific proportions. (B) Spatial distributions of D1+ and D2+ medium spiny neurons (MSNs) across anterior-posterior sections of the human basal ganglia. (C) Spatial distributions of diverse non-MSN basal ganglia. (A) Spatial distributions of two oligodendrocyte subtypes (Oligo OPALIN and Oligo PLEKHG1) in anterior and posterior sections of the human basal ganglia. (B) Spatial subregion specific distributions of six astrocyte subtypes across anteriorposterior sample sections. (C) Spatial expression maps of representative marker genes that correspond to each astrocyte subtype across anterior-posterior sample sections show subregion specific expression. striosome-matrix boundaries. (A) Heatmap of astrocytic gene expression as a function of distance from the striosome-matrix border. Distance is measured relative to the border (center), where 0 represents the striosome-matrix border, and spans -500 µm into matrix regions (negative values) and +500 µm into striosome interiors (positive values). (B) UMAP embedding computed from clustering of astrocytes located within ±500 µm from the striosome-matrix border based on genes shown in (A) in the posterior sample AP26a (left) and the spatial map showing the distribution of the subclusters relative to striosome boundaries (middle). Right: Zoomed-in view of the boxed region (left). (C) Same analysis as in (B), shown for posterior section AP34a: UMAP embedding (left), spatial distribution along striosome boundaries (middle), and zoom-in of the boxed region (right). (D) Density distribution of astrocyte subclusters as a function TABLE 1226 REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Biological samples Healthy adult basal ganglia brain tissue University of California Irvine BICAN Brain Bank Case#UCI-2724 Case#UCI-3924 Case#UCI-1311 Case#UCI-5129 Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins Isopentane Sigma-Aldrich Cat#M33631-4L Methanol Sigma-Aldrich Cat#1060071000 Ethanol (100%) Decon Labs Cat# V1016 Formamide Ambion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) Cat# AM9342 TE Buffer, pH 8.0 Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# T11493 20X SSC Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# J60839.K3 Triton X-100 Sigma-Aldrich Cat# 92046-34-9 Trolox Sigma-Aldrich Cat# 238813 Poly-D-lysine Sigma-Aldrich Cat# A-003-M Gel Slick Lonza Cat# 50640 PFA (4%) Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# 28906 DAPI Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# D1306 10% SDS Corning Cat# 46-040-Cl TEMED Sigma-Aldrich Cat# T7024 Catalase Sigma-Aldrich Cat# C30-500MG Glucose Oxidase Sigma-Aldrich Cat# G2133-250KU Zymo-Spin™ IC RNA Columns Zymo Research Cat# R1013 Zymo-Spin IIICG Columns Zymo Research Cat# C1006-250-G Zymo-Dna Clean and Conc-25 Zymo Research Cat# D4006 Zymo-Oligo Clean & Concentrator™ Zymo Research Cat# D4061 Maxima H Minus Reverse Transcriptase Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# EP0753 Phusion High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase New England Biolabs Cat# M0536L HiScribe T7 Quick High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit New England Biolabs Cat# E2050 RNase Inhibitor New England Biolabs Cat# M0314L dNTP Mix (10 mM) Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# R0192 Dextran Sulfate (20% w/v) Millipore Cat# S4030 Acrylamide: Bis-Acrylamide 19:1 (40% Solution/Electrophoresis) Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#J60868.AP Ammonium persulfate Sigma-Aldrich Cat#215589-100G Agilent Technologies D1000 Reagents Agilent Cat# D1000 Stereo-seq Permeabilization Set for Chip-on-a-slide V1.1 Complete Genomics Cat#211SP11118-CG Stereo-seq Transcriptomics Set (2cm*3cm) V1.2 STOmics/Complete Genomics Cat#111ST13231-CG Stereo-seq 16 Barcoded Library Preparation Kit V1.0 Complete Genomics Cat#111KL160 PE100 flow cells reagent Complete Genomics Cat#100008555 Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit Invitrogen Cat#Q32854 Qubit™ ssDNA Assay Kit Invitrogen Cat#Q10212 D5000 ScreenTape Assay Kit Agilent Cat#5067-5588 Oligonucleotides Encoding probes targeting 673 genes Twist Bioscience This paper; Table S1 Readout probes Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT) This paper; Supplemental Data Primers for MERFISH encoding probe synthesis Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT) This paper; Supplemental Data RT primer for cDNA synthesis in RT&TAMP Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT) This paper; Supplemental Data Software & Instrument Storm-control Harvard University Zhuang Lab (https://github.com/ZhuangLa b/storm-control) RRID: SCR_027698

To facilitate multimodal investigation of the same donor sample, each pre-dissected postmortem human coronal brain slab, which is 5-10 mm thick and containing the basal ganglia, was used in this study. To prepare adjacent brain sections for experiments, a tissue block measuring up to 4 cm × 5 cm and encompassing basal ganglia components was further dissected out of each coronal brain slab, quickly embedded in OCT embedding medium, and frozen in dry ice prechilled isopentane (SigmaAldrich, M33631). Cryosections of 10 µm and 16 µm thickness were then obtained using a Leica CM1850 cryostat at -18 to -20 °C and mounted onto Stereo-seq chips and specially coated 50 mm × 64 mm rectangular glass slides for MERFISH+, respectively. To fit the 2 cm × 3 cm Stereo-seq chips (STOmics/Complete Genomics, 111ST13231-CG), each large brain section was trimmed and/or subdivided within the cryostat to approximately 18 mm × 28 mm dimensions (Figure 1).

For Stereo-seq, tissue fixation and spatial transcriptomics procedures were conducted in accordance with the manufacturer's protocol and established methods. Briefly, tissue sections mounted on Stereo-seq chips were dried at 37°C (5 min), then fixed in precooled methanol (SigmaAldrich, 1060071000) for 30 mins at -20 °C. After fixation, sections were stained with Qubit™ ssDNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen, Q10212) and incubated in the dark for 5 mins, washed with 0.1× SSC buffer with 5% RNase inhibitor (0.05 U/mL, New England Biolabs, M0314L), the nuclei-stained tissue section was imaged using the FITC channel under a 10x microscope objective of Echo Revolution microscope (Discover Echo, RRID: SCR_027699). The resulting TIFF file was run through StereoMap ImageQC. After passing ImageQC, the chip was washed with 0.1× SSC before proceeding with permeabilization.

Permeabilization was conducted using the manufacturer's buffer (Complete Genomics, 211KT13114) at 37°C for 12 minutes. RNA captured on Stereo-seq chips from permeabilized tissue was reverse transcribed at 42°C. The tissue was then removed, and cDNA was released from the chip using a transcriptomics reagent kit (Complete Genomics, 211KT13114). After reverse transcription, tissue removal and cDNA release and cDNA collection were done at 55°C for 3 to 18 hours. After size selection, amplification, and purification, cDNA concentrations were measured with the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit (Invitrogen, Q32854). The distribution of cDNA fragment size was also measured using Agilent's D5000 ScreenTape assay (Agilent, 5067-5588). For library construction, 20 ng of cDNA per sample was processed with a library preparation kit (Complete Genomics, 111KL160) followed by DNA nanoball (DNB) generation.

Sequencing was performed on the DNBSEQ™ T7 platform at PacGenomics (Agoura Hill, CA, USA) with PE100 flow cells and 50 bp read 1 and 100 bp read 2 (Complete Genomics, 100008555).

1. Gene selection: First, we compiled 992 candidate genes that comprised 150 canonical cell type marker genes, 20 control genes (housekeeping genes) and 822 genes that were differentially expressed between Group level cell types in the reference Human basal ganglia snRNA-seq dataset from the Allen Brain Institute (RRID:SCR_006491) . We then refined the list by removing non-coding genes, and genes that are highly abundant in all cell types as they can lead to molecular crowding.

We considered genes to be highly abundant, if their mean count across cell types (Group level) was greater than 20. After this step a total of 813 genes were remaining.

Next, we identified the exon sequence from the longest isoform of each gene, and then we quantified the homology between the sequences based on a 12-nucleotide hashtable. Genes were removed if the fraction of homology was greater than 50% with pvalue less than 0.001. Based on this criteria, 149 genes were removed, leaving 673 final candidate genes.

The MERFISH library was designed using a similar pipeline described in previous studies 42- 44 . As therein, each primary encoding probe contains a 40-mer target sequence that is complementary to the mRNA sequence of a gene, three 20nt readout sequences unique for each gene and two 20nt PCR primers. However, we made one modification to this design by adding a 4th readout sequence in order to help us to troubleshoot MERFISH experiments through smFISH imaging. To design the primary probes, we first generated overlapping 40-mer target sequences from the mRNA sequence of each gene. Next, we filtered the target sequences based on off-target binding score and other predefined screening requirements such as GC content, melting temperature, and homology against the genome, transcriptome and repetitive sequences. For each gene, we retained 10-150 40-mer target sequences that met the criteria, then we concatenated each sequence to 4 readout and 2 primer sequences. Finally, we screened the concatenated sequences for homology against the whole genome and excluded primary probes that had homology scores beyond 99 percentiles.

The selection of readout sequences that were concatenated to a target sequence of a gene was guided by a MERFISH codebook, which is a set of unique binary barcodes that determines in which imaging round the fluorescence signal of each gene will show up. We designed the codebook by first generating all possible 4 hamming distance binary words of length N = 28 using the set cover algorithm 29 . Next, we used the Metropolis Hastings optimization algorithm to assign each binary word to a particular gene while minimizing the chances of molecular(signal) crowding due to shared channels when imaging genes that are co-expressed in the same cell type.

As described in the method section for MERFISH imaging, the primary probes were used in combination with adapter probes and readout probes during each imaging round. Adaptor probes are associated with a particular gene and they are made of 20nt sequence reverse complementary to the readout sequence used in the primary probe of the associated gene. In addition, they contain two identical sequences that serve as binding sites for readout probes. The readout probes are 20nt sequences that are conjugated with a fluorescence dye at the 5' or 3' end.

Primary encoding probes generation was performed from oligonucleotide pools as described previously [42][43][44] . Oligonucleotide pools and primers were purchased from Twist Biosciences and Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT), respectively. Oligo pools were amplified through PCR with approximately 18 cycles using Phusion Plus PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific, F631L). The resulting PCR product was purified and concentrated with Zymo DNA clean & concentrator-25 (Zymo Research, D4006). RNA was generated from the purified PCR-amplified DNA through in-vitro transcription (IVT) using HiScribe T7 ARCA mRNA kit (NEB, E2060S).

Next, single strand DNA (ssDNA) was generated from the IVT-derived RNA through reverse transcription (RT) using Thermo Scientific Maxima Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, EP0743). The RT product went through alkaline hydrolysis (1:1 of 1M NaOH and 0.5M EDTA) to remove RNA followed by ssDNA (encoding probes) purification using Zymo Oligo Clean & Concentrator (Zymo Research, D4061). The concentration and purity of the encoding probes were determined through NanoDrop while the size of the encoding probes was verified through Agilent TapeStation (RRID:SCR_019547). During the RT step, the forward primer introduced an acrydite anchor into the encoding probes which allowed the encoding probes to covalently bind with the polyacrylamide gel post encoding probes hybridization.

Adaptor probes (total 28 adaptors) and readout probes (total 3 readout probes each tagged with one of the three fluorophores:

5Alex750N/3AlexF750N, 5Cy5/3Cy5Sp, 5Cy3/3Cy3Sp) were purchased from IDT.

Adaptor probes and readout probes were diluted with a pre-hybridization buffer (PreHB, 0.1% Tween-20, 35% formamide, 2xSSC) with dilution factors of 1:1000 and 1:2000, respectively.

5. Silanization and PDL-coating of coverslips: 50mm x 64mm glass coverslips (CellPath, SAF-5064-02A) were incubated in 18.5% HCl in methanol for 30 min at room temperature (RT) followed by 4 washes with MiliQ water. Then coverslips were incubated in 70% ethanol for 5 min at RT followed by drying at 60°C for 30 min. Next, coverslips were incubated in a solution containing 0.1% triethylamine and 0.2% allyl trichlorosilane in chloroform for 30 min at RT. Coverslips were then washed with chloroform followed by washing with 100% ethanol. Then coverslips were dried at 60°C for 30 min. Coverslips were stacked on top of each other with a working solution of Poly-D-Lysine (PDL, SIgmaAldrich, A-003-M) (1 mg PDL/ml + RNase inhibitor) in between coverslips and incubated for ~3 hours. Next, coverslips were dried at 60°C for 30 min. Finally, silanized and PDL-coated coverslips were stored at -20°C until use (good for 6 months).

Human postmortem basal ganglia samples in OCT block were sectioned (16 µm thick) using cryostat (Leica CM1850) at -20°C and mounted onto PDL-coated pre-silanized coverslips as aforedescribed. The mounted tissue sections were air dried at room temperature for 5 minutes followed by fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for 15 min. The PFA-fixed samples were stored in a 10% glucose solution in PBS (with RNase inhibitor, 1:1000) at -80°C for future use. The PFA-fixed frozen samples were thawed and incubated with 70% (v/v) ethanol for 1 hour at room temperature. The samples were then incubated with 5% SDS (in 2xSSC) for 10 minutes at room temperature followed by three washes with 2xSSC.

Samples were incubated with PreHB for 15 minutes at room temperature. The coverslip containing the sample was transferred to a new Petri dish and 200 µl of encoding probe hybridization buffer containing 200 µg of encoding probes were added onto the sample.

The encoding probe hybridization buffer consisted of 50% (v/v) formamide in 2xSSC and 10% (wt/v) dextran sulfate, with the RNase inhibitor added. Parafilm was placed gently on the top of the sample to prevent evaporation of the encoding probe hybridization buffer (10% dextran sulfate, 50% formamide, 2xSSC) and incubated in humidified incubator for 18-24 hours at 47°C. After encoding probe hybridization, samples were washed with PreHB twice 15 minutes each at room temperature. Next, 4% polyacrylamide gel embedding of samples was performed to anchor RNA molecules at place. Samples were then post-fixed with 4% PFA for 10 minutes at room temperature.

Samples were incubated with digestion buffer containing 2% SDS in 2x SSC and 2%

proteinase K overnight at 37°C. To quench sample autofluorescence, samples (still in digestion buffer) were incubated in Vizgen photobleacher for at least 3 hours. Finally, samples were washed with 2x SSC three times and proceeded to image acquisition.

To estimate the drift between hybridization rounds, we detected image features corresponding to local minima and local maxima intensity points within the DAPI channel using the same procedure as in the spot detection step. These features were then used to register the images from different hybridization rounds using phase cross-correlation.

We decoded the detected fluorescent spots as described previously 42 .

Briefly, we matched each spot in an image to spots that are within a set distance threshold in other images across the different hybridization rounds. We then compared the intensity pattern formed by the colocalizing spots to the binary words in the codebook in order to decode their gene identity. Finally, we filtered the molecules based on their correlation to the point spread function and the distance of their normalized brightness from the matched binary word.

First, we deconvolved the flat-field corrected DAPI images using the Wiener algorithm, with the parameter beta set to 0.01, in order to improve the contrast of the nuclei boundaries. Then for each z-plane, we performed cell segmentation using the Cellpose 'nuclei' model 79 with the parameters: diameter = 23, flow_threshold = -10 and cellprob_threshold = -10. Next, we stitched the segmented images to get a 3D reconstruction of the cell masks. We then applied the masks to the decoded molecule in order to assign them to cells based on their spatial position. Finally, we generated a cell-by-gene count matrix by aggregating the transcript count of each gene in every cell. In addition, we generated cell metadata that included spatial information such as the XYZ location and volume of the imaged cells.

We preprocessed the cell by gene count matrix as follows. First, cells with total transcript counts greater than 99 percentile or less 1 percentile were filtered out. Second, cells with very large (above 98 percentile) and very small (below 2 percentile) volume were removed. Such cells arise from segmentation artifacts and usually represent incomplete or doublet cells (two different cells segmented as one).

The count matrix was then normalized by volume of cells, in order to account for the effect of cell size variation on the expression level of genes. The matrix was again normalized by the total count of transcripts in the cells in order to reduce noise arising from the difference in the relative expression of genes between cells. Finally, the data was log-normalized to ensure all genes had the same expression baseline and hence minimized the risk of masking low abundant genes.

We performed clustering analysis using classical singlecell clustering pipeline from the Scanpy package 80 . First, the graph representation of the count matrix was generated using the neighbors module, scanpy.pp.neighbors(use_rep = 'X', n_neighbors = 15). Then, the communities formed in the graph were clustered using the Leiden clustering algorithm, scanpy.tl.leiden(resolution = 1). Finally, the UMAP embedding of the clustered data was obtained by projecting the high dimensional clustering into 2D space, scanpy.tl.umap(resolution = 1, min_dist = 0.1). The annotation of cell types was done by mapping the data to the Cross-species Basal ganglion cell type taxonomy from the Allen institute through cell_type_mapper (the python backend for MapMyCells, RRID:SCR_024672) using two precomputed supporting files shared through the BICAN consortium: query_markers (a lookup table of marker genes for the taxonomy) and precomputed_stats (HDF5 file that defines the taxonomy).

We performed the subclustering analysis for astrocytes using only astrocytic genes in order to avoid artifacts from cross-talk or contamination from other cell types. To identify the genes, we applied the Wilcoxon rank sum method on the pre-processed count matrix as implemented in the rank_genes_groups function from the Scanpy package 80 .

Next, we reduced the data to cells that were labeled as astrocytes at the Subclass level and to genes that were differentially expressed in them. Following this, we performed further quantity control to remove outlier cells with volume and transcript count below 1 percentile or greater than 99th percentile. Next, we did Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and harmony integration on the normalized count matrix using the functions sc.pl.pca and sc.external.pp.harmony_intergrate from Scanpy respectively. We then constructed the KNN graph based on the principal components from harmony integration using the parameters n_neighbors = 10 and n_pcs = 20. Lastly, we ran

Leiden clustering with a resolution of 0.6.

We performed spatial module analysis with two different approaches, ( 1 however, the internal globus pallidus module partially overlapped with adjacent white matter tracts; its boundary was refined using the spatial location of GPi Shell neurons, which delineated the GPi border with high precision.

To identify spatial modules corresponding to the striosome and matrix compartment, we followed similar but slightly different procedure to that used in global spatial modules analysis. The main differences were that we only used MSN cell types when building the cell type composition matrix and we only included the cells in the striatum for the analysis as the Striosome and Matrix compartments exist only in this part of the Basal ganglia. In detail, we first built a K-nearest neighbor graph based on the spatial location of MSN subtypes using the scikit-learn package 82 , then we queried the graph to identify 50 nearest MSNs for each cell in the striatum. Next, as explained in 14 , we defined the composition matrix as distance weighted frequency count of neighboring MSN subtypes.

This matrix was then L2 normalized and clustered using the Leiden algorithm from the Scanpy package. The same analysis approach was used in human and mouse datasets.

To do spatial module analysis using gene expression, we integrated the expression values with the spatial information of cells. First, we calculated the spatial distance of each cell to neighboring cells located within a radius r using the function radius_neighbors_graph from scikitlearn 82 . Next, we took the negative exponential of the distance values and normalized them by the total distance to get a gaussian distribution. The resulting values were then multiplied with the gene expression matrix to get spatially weighted average gene expression for each cell. Next, using the Scanpy package 80 , we identified the top 5000 highly variable genes, which we then used for PCA and KNN graph computation. Finally, we did Leiden clustering to identify the spatial modules. Similar to the spatial modules analysis based on cell type composition, we did the clustering hierarchically -starting from high level to finer spatial modules. And the parameters were tuned at each hierarchy until the modules matched the anatomical regions.

Cell type enrichment analyses across spatial anatomical modules: The enrichment analysis was done following the method described in Zhang et al. 14 . We first computed the confusion matrix between spatial modules and cell types at the group level using the pivot_table function from the pandas package. Next, for each cell type, we calculated its expected average density in every spatial module as the product of the fraction of cells that belonged to the cell type and the fraction of cells found in the spatial modules. Then the enrichment score of a cell type in a spatial module was computed as the ratio of its cell density and expected average cell density in the spatial module. To quantify the significance of the result, we used a permutation test where we shuffled cell type labels and recomputed the enrichment score. We repeated this step 1000 times to generate a null distribution of the enrichment score. Then the p-value was computed as the fraction of values in the distribution that are at least as large as the observed enrichment score.

Finally, we corrected the p-values for multiple testing using the Bonferroni method.

We quantified the enrichment of cell types within the Matrix and Striosome compartments using the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel statistics 83 . For each cell type, we built contingency tables that summarize the number of cells in the compartments from each individual sample. Then, we computed the common odds-ratio as:

Where, K : is the total number of samples, ‫ܣ‬ : is the number of cells in sample i that belongs to a cell type of interest and are within the brain region of interest.

‫ܤ‬ : is the number of cells in sample i that belongs to a cell type of interest but are not within the brain region of interest.

We computed the significance of the estimated values using a permutation test. More specifically, we randomized the distance values and recomputed the regression and, then we obtained the explained variance for the estimated values. We repeated the permutation 1000 times to generate a null distribution, the p-value was then calculated as the fraction of the explained variance that were at least as greater as the observed explained variance.

To quantify the gene expression gradient along the ventromedial to dorsolateral (VM-DL) axis, we used the internal capsule as our reference since it is located approximately along this axis. We first rotated the brain sections so that the internal capsule aligns with the horizontal axis. Then we digitized the rotated coordinate values using the combination of the functions digitize and histogram from the NumPy package (RRID:SCR_008633). Next, we grouped the cells located within the same bin (digitized coordinates) and took the average of their spatially weighted gene expression values.

Following this, we quantified the expression gradient of each gene by calculating the correlation between the bin average gene expression and the axis coordinates using the pearsonr function from SciPy. Finally, we integrated the results from all stereo-seq samples by computing the mean and std of the correlation coefficients. We only kept genes whose standard deviation is below 0.2 and reported their mean correlation coefficient as final value.

We performed gene ontology enrichment analysis using the enricher function from the gget package using the "ontology" database. For each spatial module, we first identified the marker genes that were differentially expressed in each spatial module. Then we obtained the top 10 ontology terms in relation to these genes by running the enricher function. Next, we mapped each term to their parent (broad) categories by parsing the directed acyclic graph (DAG) built from the basic GO ontology file -'go-basic.obo' using the GODag module from goatools package. Finally, we computed the frequency of the parent terms in each module and calculated the proportion of the frequencies across the regions to quantify the relative abundance across the regions.

For each cell type, we first selected 100 cells whose differential gene expression correlated most with the average (pseudobulk) differential gene expression of the cell type. Then, we quantified the enrichment of every gene within the intracellular space of the cells as the fold change between transcript counts inside and outside the cell's segmentation mask. We excluded genes from further analysis if their enrichment was less than 3-fold or if they were not differentially expressed. Next, we computed the median distance between neighboring transcripts in both the somatic and putative distal neuritic spaces using the KDTree function from the SciPy package 81 . Following this, we performed density-based clustering to identify the somatic transcripts corresponding to each cell. To achieve this, we used the DBSCAN function from the scikit-learn package (RRID:SCR_002577) 82 with the maximum distance parameter set to the average of the median transcript distances in somatic and putative distal neuritic spaces. Next, we classified the nonsomatic transcripts as neuritic if they are within 20 microns from the nearest somatic transcript.

To identify the mouse homologues of the cell types detected in our human Basal ganglia MERFISH dataset, we used the imputed whole mouse brain MERFISH spatial transcriptomic dataset from an earlier publication 10 . First, we manually insepcted the mouse MERFISH data to identify tissue sections that contain brain regions corresponding to those covered in the human samples. We selected the sections of C57BL6J-638850.39 -50, which show the caudoputamen and globus pallidus regions.

Then we used the parcellation_division label "STR" and "PAL" in the dataset to select all cells located in the mouse striatum and pallidum. Next, we filtered the data by removing low abundance cell types; cell types with less than 150 cell counts. We then mapped the mouse genes to their human orthologs using the mouse human homologous gene table from the Mouse Genome informatics (MGI) database. Next, we identified the genes shared between the mouse and human MERFISH dataset and reduced the gene expression matrix in both mouse and human to the common genes. Following this, we computed the pseudobulk gene expression of each cell type at the supertype level for the mouse and at the group level for the human. Then we performed the Pearson correlation between the mouse and human expression values. Through this approach, we identified the mouse homologs of the human D1 Matrix and Striosome MSNs. Both Main Figure 7

We thank members of the Xu laboratory for their valuable feedback and discussion throughout this project. We are grateful to Dr. Ruth Walker for her insightful comments.

We also acknowledge Drs. Elizabeth and Edwin Monuki, along with our UCI colleagues, for their contributions to establishing the UCI BICAN Brain Bank and supporting the collection of neurotypical human brain samples. This work was in part funded by the NIH grant [UM1MH130994 Center for Multiomic Human Brain Cell Atlas] and UC Irvine Center for Neural Circuit technology development funds. This publication was supported and coordinated through the Brain Initiative Cell Atlas Network (BICAN, RRID:SCR_022794).

Supplementary Movie 1. MERFISH+ spatial transcriptomics of a large human basal ganglia section visualized across scales. The movie depicts successively greater magnified views starting from multi-centimeter tissue architecture to subcellular resolution scale, revealing transcriptionally distinct cell types and local cellular neighborhoods, and individual RNA transcripts visualized at submicrometer precision (color-coded by gene identity).

Table S1. Human brain sample information. Detailed information on human donor identification number, age, sex, race/ethnicity, postmortem interval (PMI) from time of death to tissue freezing, RNA integrity number (RIN) indicating sample quality, cause of death, section AP, subregions profiled. Supplemental Data for the information related to the MERFISH+ encoding probes, adaptor probes, and readout probes and the gene panel codebook. Stereo-seq Analysis Workflow STOmics RRID:SCR_025001 STAR http://code.google.com/p/rna-star/ RRID:SCR_004463 Ensembl Ensembl RRID:SCR_002344 OpenCV http://opencv.org RRID:SCR_015526 NumPy http://www.numpy.org RRID:SCR_008633 SciPy http://www.scipy.org RRID:SCR_008058 statsmodel http://www.statsmodels.org/ RRID:SCR_016074 scikit-learn http://scikit-learn.org RRID:SCR_002577 Agilent TapeStation Laptop Agilent RRID:SCR_019547 Other 50mm x 64mm glass coverslips CellPath SAF-5064-02A Allen Institute for Brain Science http://www.brain-map.org RRID:SCR_006491 BRAIN Initiative Cell Atlas Network BRAIN Initiative Cell Atlas Network RRID:SCR_022794 Brain Image Library (BIL) Brain Image Library (BIL) RRID:SCR_017272 NeMOarchive Neuroscience Multi-omic Archive (NeMO Archive) RRID:SCR_016152 Echo Revolution microscope Discover Echo RRID: SCR_027699 MGI DNBSEQ-T7 Genetic Sequencer MGI RRID:SCR_024847 Complete Genomics Complete Genomics RRID:SCR_027007 PacGenomics PacGenomics RRID: SCR_027700 1227 RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

Oligonucleotide probe sequences used for imaging can be found in Supplemental Data.

These probes or materials for making these probes can be purchased from commercial sources, as detailed in the Key Resources Table.

Image and sequencing data are in the process of being deposited at the Brain Image Board (IRB). These adult human postmortem brain samples were from white males of 36 to 53 years old and showed no evidence of neurodegenerative pathology (Table S1).

molecules; 405 nm for DAPI) at 0.4µm step size (25 frames per field of view/channel, total frames=100/field of view). After image acquisition of a round, fluorescence signals were removed through flowing stripping buffer (80% formamide in 0.8xSSC+0.1%

Tween-20) and 2xSSC before proceeding to next round of hybridization and imaging.

We processed the Stereo-seq data using the standard analysis workflow software The pipeline takes three files as an input: (1) paired-end FASTQ files, (2) mask file and

(3) mosaic image of nuclei-staining. The first read in the fastq files contains coordinate ID (CID) -spatial location identifier barcode sequence that is unique to each DNA nano ball on the stereo-seq chip, and the Molecular ID (MID) -artificially synthesized mRNAspecific sequence that helps differentiate the number of reads contributed by mRNA expression level due to amplification. The CIDs were first aligned and matched with the values in the mask file which contains the mapping of the CID barcodes to the actual spatial coordinates in the tissue. This allows the identification of the spatial location of the mRNAs within the tissue section. Reads that have MID sequence with more than one N bases or more than one bases with quality less than Q10 were excluded. The second read in the fastq file contains the actual sequence of the captured mRNA. These were aligned to a reference genome using the STAR aligner. The reference genome ‫ܥ‬ : is the number of cells in sample i that does not belong to a cell type of interest but are within the brain region of interest.

‫ܦ‬ : is the number of cells in sample i that does not belong to a cell type of interest and are not within the brain region of interest.

ܶ : is the total number of cells in the data.

Next, we quantified the significance of the result using the permutation test, as described above.

We first identified the contours for striosome borders from the spatial map of the brain section using the function findcontours from the Opencv package. Then we used the KDTree module from SciPy 81 to find the distance of each cell from the contour of the nearest striosome. We set the distance of cells within the striosome compartment as positive and negative for those that are outside. Then we binned the distance into bins of size 50 microns and computed the mean abundance of celltype within each bin.

When doing the calculation, we only considered cells that are 200 microns away from the striosome border and 500 microns into the center of the striosome. We also removed cell types that were very sparse -with less than 1 % abundance near the striosome.

To quantify the gene expression gradient with respect to the border striosomes, we computed the mean log1p gene expression of cells that are within the binned distances.

Then, we performed lowess regression using the statsmodel package to quantify the dependence of the mean gene expression on the distance of cells from the striosomes.