{"chunk_index": 0, "global_offset": 0, "total_chunks": 3, "chars": 39428, "doc_chars": 87548, "source": "structural", "doc_id": "2025.12.02.691876v1.full"}
---
• Our multi-centimeter scale spatial taxonomy identifies the precise locations of 60 neuronal and glial cell types of human basal ganglia.

• MERFISH+ and Stereo-seq platforms map consistent spatial modules that align with classical neuroanatomical nuclei.

• D1D2 hybrid MSNs and primate-expanded interneurons show regional and domain specific organization

• Subcellular RNA localization reports soma morphology and projection-inferred signatures.

We generated a multi-region, subcellular-resolution spatial transcriptomic atlas of the human basal ganglia by integrating MERFISH+ and Stereo-seq across four neurotypical donors. These datasets profiled ~7 million cells spanning the caudate, putamen, nucleus accumbens, and globus pallidus, resolving 60 transcriptionally distinct cell types.

We show region-selective, molecular and spatial diversification of medium-spiny-neuron cell types and multiple non-neuronal populations with distinct molecular identities and spatial localizations. Subcellular RNA localization captures somatic size and projectioninferred signatures that reflect direct and indirect pathway topology. Cellular community analyses reveal the enrichment of sub-clusters of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes at striosome-matrix borders, while primate-expanded interneurons are confined to matrix territories. Cross-species mapping uncovers orthologous striosome-matrix organization and conserved dorsolateral-ventromedial gene expression gradients. This atlas provides a foundational molecular and spatial framework for studying human basal ganglia architecture, offering a multi-centimeter scale resource that links cell types, spatial architecture, and subcellular transcript topography across multiple nuclei.

The human basal ganglia is a critical brain structure involved in motor control, learning and emotion. It is comprised of distinct anatomical nuclei / subdivisions including the striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen), the globus pallidus (external and internal segments, GPe and GPi), and the nucleus accumbens (NAc) 1 . Basal ganglia cell types and architecture are well characterized in rodents and non-human primates, but are much less understood in humans. The literature from both animal models and humans shows that GABAergic medium spiny neurons (MSNs) are the dominant neuronal cell type in the striatum (85-95%) [2][3][4][5] ; MSNs are divided into two major populations: D1-type MSNs, which express the dopamine receptor D1 (DRD1), tachykinin precursor 1 (TAC1), and dynorphin; and D2-type MSNs, which express the dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2), proenkephalin (PENK), and enkephalin 2,3,6 . The D1 and D2 populations are spatially organized into interdigitated striosome and matrix compartments that form the structural foundation of basal ganglia function 3,7,8 . Further studies, including those using singlenucleus RNA-seq in animal and human brains have revealed additional D1/D2 neuronal diversity 9,10 , and identified multiple classes of interneurons, including cholinergic (choline acetyltransferase-positive; ChAT+), parvalbumin-positive (PV+), somatostatinpositive (SST+), and neuropeptide Y/tyrosine hydroxylase-positive (NPY+/TH+) subtypes [10][11][12][13][14] . The nucleus accumbens, located at the ventral extension of the striatum, contains both D1 and D2 MSNs and is further divided into core and shell subregions.

These subregions mirror the cellular composition of the dorsal striatum, including diverse interneuron classes 10,15 . The globus pallidus consists of two principal divisions: the external segment (GPe) and the internal segment (GPi) 3,16 . Both regions are dominated by PV+ GABAergic projection neurons 17 . Within GPe, prototypic neurons express PV, LIM homeobox 6 (LHX6), and NK2 homeobox 1 (NKX2-1) 18,19 ; arkypallidal neurons express neuronal PAS domain protein 1 (NPAS1) and forkhead box protein P2 (FOXP2) 20,21 . GPi contains PV+/LHX6+ projection neurons that form the principal output pathway of the basal ganglia 16,17 .

A comprehensive understanding of human basal ganglia organization requires integrating cell-type identity, molecular signatures, and spatial architecture within an intact anatomical framework. Traditional single-cell RNA sequencing provides molecular resolution but lacks spatial context, limiting its ability to capture circuit-level organization. Emerging spatial transcriptomic technologies map gene expression directly within intact tissue sections that retain the spatial relationships of cell types and structures 10,14,[22][23][24] . These methods include probe-based multiplexed fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based spatially resolved transcriptomics, each with complementary strengths in resolution, transcriptome coverage, and throughput 23,25,26 . These approaches enable an unprecedented mapping of brain architecture through quantitative classification of cell types and detection of spatially patterned gene expression. Although previous studies have revealed the spatial organization of striosomes within the striatal matrix and transcriptional gradients across basal ganglia nuclei in model organisms such as mice and macaques 10,27 , a comprehensive molecular and cell-type-resolved spatial atlas of the adult human basal ganglia remains lacking. This gap has persisted in part because of the large size and complex cytoarchitecture of human basal ganglia nuclei, as well as technical limitations in the spatial scale and resolution of existing mapping approaches.

Addressing this limitation is particularly critical given the central role of the basal ganglia in human movement disorders (including Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease), neuropsychiatric conditions, and species-specific differences in basal ganglia cellular composition and structural organization that reflect the complexity of inputs and outputs for these structures in humans 7,28 .

Recent advances in large-scale spatially resolved transcriptomics have transformed our ability to characterize cellular heterogeneity and molecular architecture within intact neural tissue such as human basal ganglia. Two particularly powerful approaches are Multiplexed Error-Robust Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (MERFISH) 26,[29][30][31][32][33] and Spatio-Temporal Enhanced Resolution Omics-sequencing (Stereo-seq) [34][35][36][37][38] . MERFISH enables highly multiplexed, single-molecule RNA imaging at subcellular resolution, allowing the precise mapping of hundreds to thousands of genes within individual cells while maintaining their spatial context 26,29,31 . This approach has been instrumental in decoding cell-type organization across cortical and subcortical structures in multiple species that reveal both conserved and species-specific architectural principles in the mouse, monkey and human brains 14,27,36,[39][40][41] . Subsequent advancements in MERFISH have expanded high-resolution spatial transcriptomics into a multimodal platform capable of imaging DNA, RNA, and proteins within the same tissue specimen 42,43 . Most recently, the incorporation of modified probe designs, high-throughput microscopy, and microfluidic automation has led to MERFISH+ 44 , an enhanced implementation that enables imaging across multi-centimeter-scale tissue areas. This extension achieves large-area spatial transcriptomics with subcellular precision for integrative molecular and structural analyses 44 . Stereo-seq employs DNA nanoball-patterned arrays to generate spatially barcoded cDNA libraries that capture transcriptomes from large tissue sections at high resolution 34,[36][37][38] . Stereo-seq has been successfully applied to generate whole-brain atlases in mice and to characterize cortical and subcortical organization in nonhuman primates [34][35][36][37][38] . This sequencing-based approach provides an unbiased, genome-wide view of spatial gene-expression patterns across extensive anatomical domains, albeit at a lower spatial resolution compared with imaging-based methods such as MERFISH+.

In this study, we harness complementary strengths of MERFISH+ and Stereo-seq to generate a multiscale spatial transcriptomic atlas of the human basal ganglia to capture spatial gene-expression patterns, specific cell types, and molecular architectures across multi-centimeter tissue sections from four neurotypical adult postmortem donors. This atlas offers a novel view of human basal ganglia organization of cell types, cellular communities, and region-specific transcriptional gradients at subcellular precision that was previously uncharted.

We obtained four postmortem human brain fresh frozen slabs across anterior-toposterior segments of the basal ganglia encompassing the caudate nucleus, putamen, nucleus accumbens (NAc), globus pallidus, and internal capsule (Figure 1A). Tissue samples were collected from four neurotypical Caucasian male donors, aged 36-53 years, with no pathological evidence of neurodegenerative disease or other brain injury.

RNA quality was confirmed by RNA Integrity Number (RIN) values ranging from 7.0 to 8.4, indicating excellent preservation for downstream analyses (Table S1).

For spatial transcriptomic profiling, 10 µm-thick cryostat sections were processed for Stereo-seq with the coverage area size of up to 20 mm × 30 mm, while adjacent 16 µmthick sections were selected for MERFISH+ imaging with an area size of up to 43 mm × 30 mm (Figure 1A, Supplementary Movie 1, Table 1S & Figure 1S in Supplemental Information). A single 20mm x 30mm Stereo-seq chip captured ~0.9 million cells (with ~0.29 million cells selected for cell type classification), which were clustered into 10 different major cell types (Figure 1B). Across four Stereo-seq assays, we obtained genome-wide transcriptomic coverage of ~70,000 genes across ~3.2 million cells. In parallel, comparable numbers of cells per area were captured by MERFISH+ on adjacent sections targeting a panel of 673 selected genes (Figure 1C, Supplemental Data). Four MERFISH+ experiments captured ~3.9 million cells at single-molecule resolution over multi-centimeter-scale tissue areas. Both methods yielded highly concordant results for the spatial distributions of major cell types across corresponding anatomical regions (Figure S1A). Although Stereo-seq detects fewer transcripts per cell due to its sequencing-based capture efficiency, the expression levels of the 673 MERFISH+ target genes show strong cross-platform correlation between the two modalities (Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.71), demonstrating the quantitative agreement of spatial gene-expression measurements across methodological approaches (Figure S1B) with high reproducibility across and between experiments (Figure S1C-D). Although Stereo-seq provides transcriptome-wide coverage, its spatial signal localization is inherently more diffuse (Figure 1D-G) than MERFISH+ that delineates sharp cellular boundaries based on transcript density (Figures 1H-K; Supplementary Movie 1). Given these respective advantages and limitations, we used MERFISH+ to focus on fine-scale cell definition and subcellular localization, and Stereoseq for exploring large scale gene expression patterns across centimeter scale tissue.

Using MERFISH+, we resolve approximately 60 transcriptionally distinct cell types that are separable when embedded in Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) space of gene-expression data (Figure 2A). These cell types show expression of expected corresponding marker genes (Figure S2) and demonstrate strong correspondence with single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) datasets from the Allen Institute Mammalian Basal Ganglia Consensus Cell Type Atlas (Allen Institute; RRID:SCR_024672) 45 (Figure 2B), validating our cell type classification. We identify twelve major classes spanning anterior-to-posterior sections (Figure 2C). Among these are eight neuronal classes that include caudal and lateral ganglionic eminence (CGE/LGE)-derived GABAergic neurons, which are dominated by medium spiny neurons (MSNs) (Figure S3A).

We further examined MSNs -the predominant neuronal population of the striatum that are essential for modulating movement control in the basal ganglia circuit 3 . MSNs segregate into two canonical classes -D1 and D2 MSNs -further subdivided into six major dopaminergic MSN subtypes: STRd D1 Striosome, STRd D1 Matrix, STRv D1, STRd D2 Striosome, STRd D2 Matrix and STRv D2 (dorsal striatum, STRd; ventral striatum, STRv) (Figure 2D-E, Figure S3B). These subtypes display distinct dorsalventral and striosome-matrix distribution patterns across basal ganglia compartments along the anterior-posterior axis (Figure 2D, Figure S3B). Specifically, D1 and D2 striosomal MSNs are enriched within striosome compartments, whereas D1 and D2 matrix MSNs predominate in the surrounding matrix (Figure 2E).

The proportion of MSN cell types is largely consistent along the anterior-posterior axis (Figure 2F). D2 MSNs constitute the largest proportion compared to D1 MSNs (approximately 54 % vs 27 %, respectively). D1 and D2 MSNs together represent ~83 % of all striatal neurons.

Beyond these canonical MSN populations, our analyses uncover spatial distributions of several novel and rare MSN cell types described across species including mouse and non-human primate that are "mixed-identity" neurons that co-express D1-and D2associated gene modules -these neurons are not regionally restricted cell types to discrete striatal or pallidal territories [46][47][48] . The D1-D2 hybrid (STR D1D2 Hybrid), striosome-matrix hybrid (STRd D2 Hybrid), and D1 NUDAP (Neurochemically Unique Domains in the Accumbens and Putamen) (STRv D1 NUDAP) MSNs are primarily localized within the putamen, caudate nucleus, and nucleus accumbens (Figure 2G), but are largely absent from the globus pallidus and internal capsule. The mixed state of these cell populations is corroborated by colocalization within individual neurons of multiple transcripts of DRD1, DRD2, and prodynorphin (PDYN), a canonical striosomal MSN marker (Figure 2H).

We next examined neuronal subtypes within the globus pallidus. Analysis of two posterior sections encompassing both internal (GPi) and external (GPe) segments reveal six transcriptionally distinct GP-associated neuronal classes: GPi Shell, GPi Core, GPin-BF Cholinergic, CN LHX6-GBX1, GPe SOX6-CTXND1, and GPe MEIS2-SOX6 (Figure 2I, Figure S4). As indicated by their nomenclature, GPi Shell and GPi Core neurons are localized to peripheral and central GP regions, respectively (Figure 2J). In contrast, GPe SOX6-CTXND1 and CN LHX6-GBX1 neurons are concentrated within the GPe and show only sparse distributions in other basal ganglia nuclei (Figure 2K).

In addition to neuronal classes, we uncovered multiple non-neuronal populations with distinct molecular identities and spatial localizations (Figure 3A, Figure S5). Four major categories are observed: immune, vascular, astrocytic/ependymal (Astro-Epen), and oligodendrocyte lineage (OPC-Oligo) cells, each exhibiting characteristic regional patterns. OPC-Oligo cells represent the oligodendrocyte lineage and form the most abundant non-neuronal population, comprising 60-70% of all non-neuronal cells (Figure 3A-left). This group includes five transcriptionally distinct subtypes: committed oligodendrocyte progenitors (COP), oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPC), Oligo PLEKHG1, immune-associated oligodendrocytes (ImOligo), and Oligo OPALIN (Figure 3A-right). Notably, Oligo OPALIN and Oligo PLEKHG1 display complementary spatial distributions (Figure 3B) with differential transcriptional signatures (Figure 3C). We found that Oligo OPALIN cells are enriched along striatopallidal fiber tracts (arrows, Figure 3B-right), whereas Oligo PLEKHG1 cells are preferentially localized to the internal capsule white matter and globus pallidus, but are sparse in the putamen and caudate nucleus -this pattern is consistent across different sections (Figure S6A).

We found that astrocytes also exhibit pronounced regional heterogeneity. Subclustering analysis identifies six astrocyte subtypes, each defined by distinct marker gene combinations that include aquaporin 4 (AQP4), aquaporin 1 (AQP1), solute carrier family 6 member 11 (SLC6A11), chitinase 3-like 1 (CHI3L1), and adhesion G protein-coupled receptor V1 (ADGRV1) (Figure 3D). These subtypes form discrete clusters in UMAP space with divergent transcriptional signatures (Figure 3E). Except for the ventricle-associated astrocytes (Ventricle_Astro, captured in section AP19), the relative abundances of astrocyte subtypes are generally consistent across anterior and posterior basal ganglia regions (Figure 3F). Spatial mapping reveal distinct topographic specializations (Figure 3G and Figure S6B-C): WM_Astro cells, characterized by high AQP1 expression, are localized primarily to white matter tracts and the peripheral globus pallidus (Figure 3H); STR_Astro-2 cells, defined by ADGRV1, are enriched in striatum (Figure 3I), and GP-TH_Astro cells, expressing SLC6A11, are selectively concentrated in the globus pallidus (Figure 3J). The differential gene expression of these varied astrocytic cell types likely provides clues for their specific function. For instance, SLC6A11 (also known as GAT-3) is a GABA transporter that is important for GABA uptake and metabolism in astrocytes 49,50 , consistent with the high abundance of GABAergic neurons in the globus pallidus. These findings underscore the molecular, cellular, and spatial heterogeneity of glial and neuronal populations that define the complex architecture of the human basal ganglia.

The high spatial precision of MERFISH+ enables the localization of individual RNA molecules at subcellular resolution (Figure 1J-K; Supplementary Movie 1). This allows each transcript to be categorized as nuclear (within the nucleus), somatic (within the cytoplasm), or putative cellular processes (distributed along processes or extensions) (Figure 4A) (see STAR Methods). While nuclear and somatic transcripts are used to define cell identity, we developed additional analysis to capture somatic morphology of single neurons. We also used the RNA distributions in putative cellular processes to reveal information about projection topology in human basal ganglia.

To estimate somatic size, we modeled each cell's cytoplasmic space as a threedimensional point cloud derived from somatic RNA coordinates, which was then converted into a volumetric mesh representation (see STAR Methods). This analysis reveals substantial heterogeneity in neuronal soma volumes across basal ganglia regions (Figure 4A-B). Cholinergic interneurons and globus pallidus neurons including GPi Core, GPi Shell, CN LHX6-GBX1, and GPe MEIS2-SOX6 populations, exhibit the largest median soma volumes (up to ~9,400 µm³), whereas LAMP5+ interneurons and MSNs display markedly smaller volumes (~1,800 µm³ and ~2,500 µm³, respectively) (Figure 4B). This is consistent with histological studies in mouse and human basal ganglia [51][52][53] . Although MSN subtypes are more consistent in soma volumes, other neuronal classes exhibit more subtype-dependent variability; for example, SST-CHODL interneurons have among the largest median volumes (~6,200 µm³), while SST-ADARB2 interneurons are significantly smaller (~2,300 µm³) (p-value = 6.9 x 10 -15 , Wilcoxon rank-sum test). These quantitative reconstructions highlight the pronounced morphological diversity among neuronal subtypes in the human basal ganglia.

We next analyzed RNA distributions in putative cellular processes including axonal and dendritic processes ("neurite transcripts") which provide indirect information about neuronal projections. Focusing on MSNs, in the mouse and monkey basal ganglia circuitry, D1 matrix MSNs project directly to the GPi and substantia nigra pars reticulata, whereas D2 matrix MSNs form the indirect pathway via the GPe 3,54 . Consistent with this organization, we found that D1-enriched transcripts (e.g., RELN, EBF1, SLIT1) exhibit higher extra-somatic signal density within the GPi, while D2-enriched transcripts show preferential accumulation in the GPe (Figure 4C-D). Quantitative correlation analysis across the 673 genes imaged with MERFISH+ confirms this relationship: D1specific genes display significantly higher spatial correlation scores in the GPi than in the GPe, whereas the inverse pattern is observed for D2-specific genes (Figure 4E). In addition, we observed that GPi and GPe regions have high concentration of extrasomatic SEMA3E and SEMA5A, ligands part of the semaphorin family of axonal guidance molecules 55,56 . We found SEMA3E is enriched in GPe (Figure 4F), while SEMA5A is prominently found in GPi (Figure 4H). Their expression is also higher in the nuclei as confirmed using the snRNA-seq data from the Allen Institute Basal Ganglia Consensus Cell Type Atlas (Figure 4G, I). This might reflect that specific semaphorin gene family members mediate long range connections in neurons such as MSNs targeting specific segments of the globus pallidus 55,57 . Together, these findings demonstrate that MERFISH+ not only resolves molecular and spatial identities of cells but also captures morphological and projection-inferred features encoded in the subcellular transcriptome and provides an unprecedented window into the structural and functional organization of human basal ganglia circuits.

To resolve mesoscale organization beyond individual cell types, we performed cellular community analysis 14,58 , which groups cells based on the composition of their spatial neighborhoods. Specifically, for each cell, we calculated the frequency of neighboring cell types within a radius of 250 -400 µm and then constructed neighborhood composition vectors which were subsequently clustered into spatial modules (STAR Methods and Figure 5A). This approach yields 14 discrete spatial modules that correspond to anatomical regions defined in the Allen Human Brain Atlas 59 (Figure 5B).

Each spatial module display characteristic cell-type enrichment patterns corresponding to known anatomical domains 13 . For example, GPe SOX8-CTXND1 and GPe MEIS2-SOX6 neurons are enriched in the external globus pallidus (GPe), whereas GPi Core and GPi Shell neurons are confined to the GPi. Similarly, STRv D1 and STRv D2 MSNs are enriched in the nucleus accumbens shell and core, while STRd D1 and STRd D2 MSNs populate the striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen) (Figure 5C).

Besides these canonical distributions, several interneuron and projection-type populations exhibit distinct regional biases. For instance, STR fast-spiking PTHLH-PVALB GABAergic interneurons are preferentially enriched in the caudate nucleus (Figure 5D, in agreement with previous snRNA-seq analysis 11 . STRd ChAT+ GABAergic interneurons are more abundant in the putamen (Figure 5E). In contrast, FM GATA3-TCF7L2 neurons, a transcriptionally distinct population with unclear lineage affiliation are enriched in the GPi nucleus of the basal ganglia; ; this represents a previously unknown neuronal subtype within this region (Figure 5F).

Quantitative analysis of MSN subtype proportions across striatal subregions reveals that the caudate nucleus and putamen share comparable D1/D2 ratios (Figure 5C). In contrast, both D1-and D2-striosomal MSNs are detected in the NAc shell but are largely absent from the NAc core (Figure 5G-H). This differential organization is corroborated by the expression of established molecular markers: TH associated with striosome compartments 3 , is enriched in the NAc shell, whereas KIRREL3, a matrixassociated marker 60 , is predominantly expressed in the NAc core (Figure 5I). These findings demonstrate that cellular community analysis reconstructs macroscopic anatomical boundaries and allows for the identification of cell types located within or absent from the anatomical regions comprising the human basal ganglia circuits.

Beyond its mesoscale structures, the striatum exhibits micro-domain architecture composed of striosome and matrix compartments 61 . To delineate these domains, we further applied cellular community analysis restricted to MSN subtype composition-the principal determinant of striosome-matrix identity (Figure 6A-B). Beyond canonical D1/D2 MSN distributions, we identify additional cell types exhibiting previously uncharacterized striosome-matrix enrichments. Notably, STR TAC3-PLPP4 interneurons are exclusively localized to the matrix compartment (Figure 6C, 6D top).

These interneurons are primate-specific 62,63 and likely represent the orthologous lineage of rare Tac2+/TH+ interneurons that is described in rodents 17,64 . In our human dataset, STR TAC3-PLPP4 neurons are among the most abundant population of striatal interneurons (Figure 6E). This expansion is consistent with the trend of expansion for this cell type seen in prior primate and human studies, whereas their putative mouse homologs represent only ~6% of interneurons [62][63][64] . This marked expansion of TAC3-PLPP4 interneurons in primates suggests an evolutionary adaptation that supports the integration of the greater density of prefrontal and associative cortical inputs, potentially enabling enhanced sensorimotor and cognitive control 11,65 . Conversely, VIP+ and LAMP5+ interneurons display moderate enrichment within striosomal territories (Figure 6C, 6D bottom), although these populations are not exclusive to that compartment. To further explore the organization of cell types across the matrix-striosome boundary, we quantified the distance of each cell to the nearest striosome boundary and analyzed cell-type-specific density profiles as a function of proximity (Figure 6F). This analysis reveals astrocyte and Oligo OPALIN oligodendrocyte enrichment near striosome borders that form boundary-aligned microdomains (Figure 6G, 6H bottom). The Oligo OPALIN subtype, previously identified along striatopallidal fiber tracts (Figure 3), appears to delineate the perimeters of striosomal territories and highlights glial contributions to compartmental architecture.

To assess whether gene expression varies systematically with spatial proximity to striosomes, we examined transcript gradients along the striosome-to-matrix axis.

Several astrocyte-enriched genes exhibit distance-dependent expression patterns (Figure S7A). Clustering based on these genes resolves four astrocyte subpopulations that occupy distinct positional zones-core, boundary, and perimatrix (Figures 6H, top); this organization is consistent across different sections (Figure S7B-E).

We next investigated cross-species conservation of this organization using the Allen Institute's whole-mouse-brain MERFISH dataset 10 . Orthologous mouse MSNs were identified by correlating gene-expression signatures with human subtypes (Figure S8A, B). Mouse supertypes 0268 STR D1 GABA_4 and 0267 STR D1 GABA_3 correspond to human STRd D1 Striosome and STRd D1 Matrix MSNs, respectively (Figure S8C-D).

Similarly, finer subclustering of the mouse 0277 STR D2 Gaba_4 supertype, designated as A* and B*, map to human STRd D2 Striosome MSN and STRd D2 Matrix MSN, respectively (Figure S8E-F).

Using these orthologous MSN pairs, we delineated striosome-matrix boundaries in the mouse striatum and performed analogous proximity analyses in which we computed the distance of cells from border of nearest striosome (Figure 6I) and quantified the distribution of cells as a function of distance. The results are highly concordant across species: specific glial populations, Astro-TE NN_3 astrocytes and MOL NN_4 oligodendrocytes, are enriched at striosome borders in mice (Figure 6J-K).

These findings demonstrate conserved organizational principles and orthologous cellular microenvironments within striosome-matrix systems of the human and murine basal ganglia. The identification of matrix-confined TAC3-PLPP4 interneurons and boundary-enriched glial subtypes further reveals an evolutionarily elaborated compartmental architecture in the human striatum that integrates neuronal and nonneuronal components across spatial scales.

While cell-type composition defines spatial modules, these modules ultimately emerge from underlying transcriptional programs. To directly examine these patterns, we applied unsupervised clustering to spatially weighted whole-transcriptome profiles derived from Stereo-seq data, independent of prior cell-type annotation (see Methods). This spatial analysis recapitulates the mesoscale modules identified by MERFISH+ cellular community analysis and aligns closely with established anatomical territories of the human basal ganglia (Figure 7A, Figure S9A).

Each spatial module is characterized by distinct sets of regionally enriched genes (Figure 7B-C, Figure S9B), indicating the molecular specialization among the subregions of the basal ganglia. For example, the putamen exhibits strong enrichment of ZNF385B (a zinc-finger transcription factor) and ROBO2 (an axonal guidance molecule), whereas the caudate nucleus shows elevated expression of TAC1(a neuropeptide precursor) and EGR1(an immediate early transcription factor). The nucleus accumbens shell is marked by vesicle associated molecules SCG2 and CALY, while the NAc core is enriched for stress-response genes HSPA6 and DNAJB1 (Figure 7C).

We further examined the transcriptional difference between the regions by performing gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis on the differentially expressed genes.

Pathways such as synaptic signaling and regulation of cell communication are mainly associated with putamen and NAc shell, while processes such as regulation of secretion by cell and regulation of response to stress prominently involve the caudate with some contribution from the NAc shell and NAc core respectively. Some GO terms are uniformly distributed among multiple regions; regulation of transport involves the caudate, NAc-shell, and white matter, and negative regulation of cellular process is linked to the caudate, NAc core and NAc shell (Figure 7D).

In our Stereo-seq data, the genes displaying regional specificity constitute only ~5%; majority of the remaining genes are expressed throughout the striatum. This led us to ask whether gene expression gradients in the human striatum are similar to those known in mice and non-human primates 4,5,66 . To investigate topographical continuity of gene expression across species we focused on dorsolateral-ventromedial (DL-VM) expression gradients, an established organizational axis in the mouse striatum 14,66 . We find numerous genes in the human striatum that display graded expression along this axis (Figure 7E). For example, PDE10A, NRGN, and SLIT1 are dorsolaterally enriched, whereas NNAT, CRYM, and RAP1GAP exhibit ventromedial bias. Importantly, the majority of gradient-aligned genes show directionality concordance across species as illustrated by the similarity of the gradient scores (Figure 7F) and spatial expression maps (Figure 7G and Figure S9C) of genes between mouse and human. This underscores evolutionarily conserved transcriptional patterning that likely supports shared basal ganglia circuit architecture and function. In addition, we observe in both mouse and human, the expression gradient is dominated by the ventromedial direction (Mouse: 73%, Human: 97.2%) as opposed to the dorsolateral direction (Mouse: 26%, Human: 2.73%) (Figure 7H and Figure S9D).

To identify cellular contributors to these spatial gradients, we mapped gradientassociated genes onto cell types defined in the Allen Institute Basal Ganglia Consensus Cell Type Atlas. Most gradient-associated transcripts are enriched in lateral ganglionic eminence (CN/LGE)-derived GABAergic neurons, the principal MSN population. A subset of dorsolateral-enriched genes, however, are expressed within oligodendrocyte lineage (OPC-Oligo) cells, that reflects the dense myelinated fiber tracts that occupy dorsal striatal territories (Figure 7I). In contrast, in mouse we do not observe this; LGE neurons dominate in both directions (Figure S9E). These analyses demonstrate that Stereo-seq captures transcriptome-wide spatial gradients that mirror functional and anatomical axes of the basal ganglia. The high concordance of these gradients between humans and mice highlights conserved molecular topographies that organize the macroscale regions across species (Figure 7F-I).

Our cellular community analysis based on the proximity of the 60 identified cell types reveals 14 spatial modules in the human basal ganglia sections, providing an unbiased, refined anatomical delineation of the imaged regions that aligns closely with the Allen Human Brain Atlas parcellation 59 . The differential enrichment of cell-types across spatial modules recapitulates expected spatial segregations based on the Mammalian Basal Ganglia Consensus Cell Type Atlas reference (Allen Institute; RRID:SCR_024672)

in NAc; STRd D1/D2 in the caudate/putamen) including regional interneuron biases: STR FS PTHLH-PVALB enriched in the caudate, ChAT+ enriched in the putamen, and FM GATA3-TCF7L2 concentrated in GPi. Within NAc, we uncover that both D1-and D2-striosomal MSNs populate NAc shell but are largely absent in core, consistent with TH (striosome) and KIRREL3 (matrix) compartment markers.

The matrix and striosome spatial modules derived from MSN subtype composition reveals fine-scale spatial organization biases. Specifically, TAC3-PLPP4 interneurons, which are expanded in primates 64 , are matrix-restricted, whereas VIP+ and LAMP5+ interneurons are striosome-enriched but not exclusive. Across the striosome boundaries, we find enrichment of specific subpopulations of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes which delineates boundary-aligned glial microdomains. Cross-species comparison with the MERFISH-derived mouse cell type atlas 10,14 identifies orthologous MSN counterparts (e.g., mouse 0268 D1 and 0267 D1 supertypes corresponding to human STRd D1 striosome and matrix respectively) and confirms border-enriched astrocyte (Astro-TE NN_3) and oligodendrocyte (MOL NN_4) supertypes in mouse. These data argue for conserved compartment organization principles and orthologous boundary microenvironments between human and rodent striata, while also highlighting primate and human specializations (e.g., matrix-restricted TAC3-PLPP4) 67,68 .

MERFISH+ subcellular transcript localizations enable characterization of cell morphology and projection-inferred connectivity. Our 3D analysis of RNA transcript localization provides soma-volume measurements that span ~5-fold variation across neuronal types. Although this strategy differs from traditional methods that offer more detailed cell morphology, including immunofluorescence staining and Cajal-Golgi impregnation methods 69,70 , the key advantage of MERFISH+ based quantification is its ability to distinguish and measure dozens of neuronal subclasses at tissue-wide scale.

We find that cholinergic interneurons and pallidal neuron subtypes (e.g., GPi Core/Shell; GPe NDB-SI-LHX6/8-GBX1; GPe MEIS2-SOX6) exhibit the largest soma volumes, whereas LAMP5+ interneurons and MSNs are among the smallest. These findings are supported by previous histological observations in basal ganglia [51][52][53] . While the nine MSN subtypes show largely similar volumes, SST+ interneuron subclasses diverge markedly; for example, SST-CHODL versus SST-ADARB2 interneurons show substantial differences. These physical parameters could inform future neural network models in classifying cell types based on label free methods reporting on size and morphology 71,72 . Quantification of putative "neuritic" transcripts within the GPi and GPe recapitulates in human the canonical projection pathways measured directly in animal models. Specifically, D1-enriched genes (e.g., RELN, EBF1, SLIT1) are found to preferentially accumulate in GPi projections, whereas D2-enriched genes are biased to GPe projections. These correlation patterns recapitulate the direct (D1→GPi) versus indirect (D2→GPe) pathway topology in rodent and non-human primate models 3,6,68 . Thus, subcellular transcript "geography" provides a quantitative readout of both cell size/shape and projection-inferred circuitry in human brain tissue.

Unsupervised clustering of the whole-transcriptome spatial distribution (based on Stereo-seq) recapitulates MERFISH+ cell-type community modules and classical anatomy and provides novel gene enrichment within each anatomical subregions. We find that a dorsolateral-ventromedial gradient emerges as a dominant axis of transcriptional variation at the multi-centimeter-scale; this axis is conserved in the mouse at the multi-millimeter scale 10,14 revealing dorsolateral-biased genes such as PDE10A, NRGN and SLIT1 and ventromedial-biased genes such as NNAT, CRYM, RAP1GAP. Most of the genes exhibiting the gradient are expressed in CN LGE GABA neurons, with a dorsal contribution from OPC-Oligo lineages, consistent with differential myelination in the dorsal fiber bundles 73,74 .

Functionally, the underlying cell types, cellular communities, subcellular transcript geography, and conserved spatial gradients suggest an intricate multi-layered organizational architecture for neurotypical human basal ganglia 75,76 . The finding that subcellular RNA localization captures projection-inferred signatures suggests a promising avenue for inferring human circuit topology directly from spatial transcriptomic data -an approach that circumvents the limitations of traditional neural tracing in human tissue. In addition, astrocyte and oligodendrocyte niches aligned with striosome boundaries point to specialized metabolic and myelination interfaces at these compartmental perimeters. Finally, the primate-expanded, matrix-restricted TAC3-PLPP4 interneurons may reflect evolutionary adaptations to the enlarged prefrontal cortex, potentially supporting the increased computational demands of human-specific action selection, valuation, and cognitive flexibility 11 .

Clinically, our dataset highlights specific neuronal and glial subtypes including GPi core versus shell populations and boundary-enriched glial communities, as potential substrates of selective vulnerability in movement and neuropsychiatric disorders.

Establishing the neurotypical abundance and spatial distribution of D1, D2, and D1/D2 hybrid MSN subtypes in the caudate, putamen, and nucleus accumbens provides a crucial baseline for detecting disease-associated shifts in cell number, composition, and transcriptional state. Such comparisons will be particularly valuable for elucidating celltype-selective vulnerability in basal ganglia disorders, including Huntington's disease and Parkinson's disease 77,78 .

This study is limited by the number and demographic diversity of available donors, as well as inherent constraints associated with postmortem human tissue. Although our multimodal spatial framework provides a comprehensive baseline, additional orthogonal validations such as immunohistochemistry, in situ sequencing, and in vivo electrophysiological or connectivity assays would further strengthen cell-type and spatial community assignments. Future work should extend this approach to a broader range of ages and demographic backgrounds and apply this methodology to comparative analyses of neurological and psychiatric disorders in human tissue.